This is January 11, 1981, an interview with Tom
Wetzel, landscape architect, graduate of Texas
A&M in the Department of Urban and Regional
Planning, as well as the Department of Landscape
Architecture. Tom has been living in Austin for
three years, and it's with this in mind and his
particular perception of the physical
environment that he may be able to provide a
particular insight into the planning process in
Austin as he has come to know it. Tom, would you like
to give us a bit of information about your firm,
perhaps to begin with, and the project that you've
been working on for Austin? That might be a good
place to begin.
I'm with Myrick Newman-Dahlberg, who are
landscape architects and urban planners. We are
presently working on a project titled the Lower
Waller Creek Development, which is a city project
of the redevelopment of the Waller Creek segment
between 11th Street and Town Lake. This segment of
the creek has been historically basically a
sewer. And the objective is to develop a hike and
bike trail promenade walkway from Symphony
Square at 11th Street to Town Lake. The project was
begun in approximately 1975 with authorization
from the Friedman Council to develop a
comprehensive study of the entire area that would
develop a direction for planning and
opportunities, or at least to point out
opportunities, in this eastern side of the
Central Business District. The project
progressed through 1975 with the culmination of a
planning study by the joint venture consultants
of Myrick, Newman, Dahlberg, Taniguchi,
Scheffelman, Minter, Vacker, and Fries and
Nichols. The three consultants, landscape
architects, architects and engineers,
developed a comprehensive plan for the Lower Wall
Creek area, which included all aspects of urban
design.
The project is now under its first phase of
construction, which is approximately a 1.5
million dollar bond funds used by the city for this
particular project. No federal funds are
involved. Subsequent phases of the project would
include flood water diversion and other
amenities along the creek. Already there has been
a increase in the activity of real estate along the
creek as more and more local developers realize
the potential of the creek area once the city has
taken the initial step to clean up and to provide
some amenities that will attract local residents
to the area. Thomas, could you go into the origins
of the project? The spark plugged the thing
initially. Was it an individual or a commission?
And who do you report to as a consortium in City
Hall? Who is managing the project for the city? The
initial planning on the project occurred prior to
my employment with Myrick Newman Dahlberg. And so
I guess I'm truthfully only sketchy on those
details. The potential of Waller Creek has been a
famous or infamous planning and architecture
study for the University of Texas architecture
department for many, many years, as well as the
town lake development was, similar to the large
Trinity Lake proposal for downtown Dallas, where
they would redevelop the Trinity River channel.
So the history of the project, I guess, probably
goes back maybe 40 years in Austin's history.
People have been concerned about the creek. But it
wasn't until the Friedman Council, who was
probably the most environmentally oriented
council that this city has ever seen, it wasn't
until that council that real action and steps were
taken. As far as us as consultants, Our dealings
from the planning stage through this
construction phase have been basically with
originally what was called the Building
Construction Department, which is now part of
Public Works, and the prime client is the Parks and
Recreation Department. In fact, any kinds of
changes during this construction phase, we first
consult with Parks and Recreation as to our
recommendation, and basically Public Works is a
functionary and sees that it occurs, you know, the
actual construction. Very good. There has been,
since the early planning stages of the project in
75, there has been a change in the city council.
There has been a tremendous change in the city
council as far as direction and their interest or
concern about development. And there has been a
change within the city staff of reorganization
nature, which has really complicated the project
as far as consultants are concerned. And many of
the city staff who originally had provided
planning direction are no longer with the city or
have changed departments completely and have
nothing to do with it and this as consultants
frequently leaves us out in the cold in trying to
either justify a particular design decision or
whatever the circumstance may be it's not
necessarily a perfect working arrangement
well Thomas,
going on to the major planning thrust of Austin,
taking a look at what has been happening in the
recent past that you feel comfortable and
knowledgeable about discussing, would you care
to comment on the character of the planning
activities in Austin with regard to any aspects of
it that might occur to you, such as
transportation, environmental quality, growth
control, growth management, new industry, human
services, whatever might be indicated. It
appears that the planning department in Austin,
the city function of planning, has a very low
profile.
functions it appears to me to be rather
reactionary and their direction seems to come
solely from the council at the council's whim for
instance there we do have a comprehensive plan
which like many plans in texas has no real teeth to
it and despite what the plan says the city is still
building utilities to sensitive environmental
areas. So there doesn't seem to be much, although
the planning department exists and they do
recommend basically zoning change, zoning
change recommendations and subdivisions and
they seem to want to check to make sure that the
subdivision applicant has applied and has
crossed all his I's and dotted all his T's. But they
really don't do much planning. Austin is a
desirable city to live in. Everyone comments
about its environmental quality but from my
viewpoint that is only pure circumstance and
there is nothing within the city to protect what we
have. There is no ordinance which that controls
the cutting of trees. There is a landscape
ordinance which only speaks to putting grass and
not covering a property from one property line to
another with asphalt. That's all it requires is
that the property not be totally covered. So
you're drawing the distinction between the
natural resource environment and the man-made
environment. Well, yes. I understand what you
mean by that question. What I'm saying is... When
you're saying that Austin is considered by
everyone to be desirable, you say it's a matter of
circumstance or happenstance. Yes. The hills are
beautiful. Yeah, there's a natural resource
base. Right. Yeah. But then man has not done much to
accommodate an enhancement of that. Certainly
not when the city council, as recommended by the
planning department, approves... a large
shopping center to be built in the southwest
hills. And they have scalped the top of the hills
and have two to one slopes that can never be
maintained and have totally destroyed one of the
natural scenic features. Which area? It's all the
things we came here for. Many of them are going to be
quickly destroyed. Is there any way to identify
that area? Oh, sure. It's all been identified. I
mean, but what does it have a name? Yeah, it does,
really. It's Barton Creek Mall or whatever it is.
And it's a Melvin Simons shopping center
development. And you've seen that shopping
center over in College Station that they're
developing. And of course, the easiest way, most
cost efficient way to develop a shopping center is
to mow down everything and flatten the site. And
when you're trying to do that in the southwest
hills of Austin, that's very difficult to do. Is
that the Tennessee firm? No, they're from Ohio.
Ohio. Yeah. But it just seems like there are no real
protections. And planning is pretty weak. If the
mayor wants to see that something gets done,
she'll see that it gets done and be damned with what
the general plan says. Although the general plan
is very environmentally concerned. And the
general plan was, I think, done in a very, very good
way, from what I understand, in terms of citizen
participation. And that general plan speaks to a
north-south development corridor for Austin,
period. And you wouldn't see the city trying to put
sewer and water lines to the southwest hills if
there was any control over departments that meant
that the department needed to comply with,
generally speaking, with the general plan. So the
plan says this, but their policy is we go ahead and
do business over here as usual. How many, how big a
line do you want? Do you have any responses to the
transportation system, circulation system of
Austin?
In terms of airports, freeways, thoroughfares,
city streets, just getting around Austin, is that
an easy thing to do? It's not really. The 41st
Street, 38th and 1â„2 Street, 35th Street corridor
going east and west was identified years ago in a
transportation plan as being a major, developed
into a, upgraded into a major thoroughfare to sort
of for crosstown traffic. And the citizens didn't
want that. And I'm not sure it ever got there. so far
as to be any kind of conflict, but it never has been
done. And I'm not sure that it ever will. The
freeway, the Mopac Freeway, which is nearing its
completion, or at least what they say is going to be
the completed portion of it or the completed
length of it, that has provided north-south
transportation in the western part of the city,
and Interstate 35 fills that same function in the
east part of the city. In the north, there is
Highway 183, which badly needs to be upgraded to a
freeway standard. Unfortunately, it really
does. And that's a function of the building permit
process and zoning changes. In other words, the
city policy was to go ahead and allow all these
businesses and subdivisions to develop out
there, but all they had going to it was a four-lane
highway. with traffic lights and curb cuts. What
about Ben and White? Ben and White sort of the same
way. It serves as a major thoroughfare, but it
really almost needs to be a freeway. So they sort of
built what was improper. And especially with a
policy that says we'll approve any subdivision
you want to build out here. So there doesn't seem to
be much coordination, again, between the
function of transportation planning, and the
permit process to build something.
Tom, a city like Austin always has several
projects going. And Austin is, by Texas
standards, an all city. And presumably, they have
small districts that need attention. Could you
describe perhaps some of the projects that are
underway now that the city looks forward to
benefiting by upgrading and rehabbing and so
forth? Well, probably the most outstanding
feature of Austin is from an urban design
standpoint and a historical standpoint as well is
Congress Avenue and the entire downtown area.
many buildings dating to some of the very early
structures built in Austin. Many of which are
undergoing adaptive reuse and at the same time
others are demised by the arson's torch. So we have
some very strange things happening in downtown
Austin. But probably the most
prominent in the last couple of years has been the
Congress Avenue redevelopment. Congress Avenue
is a broad six-lane street leading directly to the
state capitol. And there is a magnificent vista
from the South Congress across the Colorado River
to the capitol at the terminus of the avenue. The
street in And almost just before the turn of the
century, it was still a dirt street. And despite
the fact that they had some rather grand buildings
built along the side of the avenue. But over a
period of years, everything seemed to get paved
and sidewalks were built. And what we ended up with
was a rather dismal urban space leading to the most
important structure in the state. So about five
years or so ago, and I believe this may have been
also under the Friedman Council, which was a very
active council, doing a lot of good things, it
seems. But they approved a renovation plan for
Congress Avenue. And the plan included several
different phases. One of the most important ones
was flood control due to poor drainage
conditions. the avenue and buildings that had
basements would frequently flood. And so when I
first came to Austin three years ago, they were
just completing a giant storm sewer down the
middle of Congress Avenue. One would have thought
they might have considered the inclusion of a
rapid rail transit while they had the city street
open, but they didn't. That obviously was not part
of the picture. Or planned it maybe. Yes, they
hadn't planned that at all. So at any rate, at this
point, approximately six months ago, the city had
completed an urban streetscape plan for Congress
Avenue, which included trees and so forth, and
widened sidewalks, other street amenities that
might be appropriate for a grand avenue leading to
the state capitol. Benches and drinking
fountains and a small kiosk and a new sign system
and traffic lights and so forth, all of which was to
be designed, which was to be in keeping and to
harmonize and so forth with the urban area. The
plans were completed by an architecture firm.
At the same time, it became knowledge of the
general public that in order to accomplish the
widened sidewalks and so forth, they were going to
have to eliminate two lanes of traffic. One lane in
each direction. One lane in each direction would
be eliminated. And this would accommodate the
construction of tree wells and so forth, because
many of the buildings have basements that extend
out to the street curb under the sidewalk. So in
order to make everything consistent, we had to
move out. There were a number of downtown
merchants who organized a campaign to not accept
this particular plan, not to narrow the streets,
not to eliminate approximately 50 or 60 parking
places, which was going to have to occur. Their
basis, of course, was they were afraid they were
going to lose business. If one would walk down
Congress Avenue, you would quickly identify
Congress as a dying downtown business street with
a lot of discount drugstores and other rather
low-class types of businesses. There are a few
good stores that have hung on, such as
Scarborough's and so forth. This avenue also has
several banks that face on it. And several of the
banks also felt that they didn't want to see the
street narrowed. you have to be familiar with the
Texas banking laws to realize that a branch bank or
a drive-in bank has to be within 500 feet or a
thousand feet, some ridiculous distance close to
the main bank, and therefore of course they were
concerned that their customers would have
difficulty getting to their drive-in bank.
That's why they were opposed to it. So at any rate,
what happened was the city, despite all the
controversy and even controversy on the council,
the mayor wanted to block off a street with
barricades and pretend like we had widened the
sidewalks and see if we had a traffic problem.
Because the big hue and cry is, oh, we don't have any
place for the automobiles to go. Well, in fact,
Congress, although it's a grand avenue, really
doesn't go anyplace. It's dead end at the capital
end, so to speak. And included in the plan,
incidentally, was the changing of bus routes and
so forth. And, of course, the re-signaling and the
total thing. And at any rate, finally this group
that opposed the whole plan, led by the merchants,
decided that the only way they were going to stop
the Congress Avenue renovation and the narrowing
of the street, which was their point of
contention, was to get up a referendum. And they
were successful in getting the 25% signatures of
the last number of voters in an Austin election.
and presented their petition to the council, and
their petition, the names were verified and so
forth. So the council was faced with either
stopping the project totally or perhaps
submitting it to the voters in the February
election. The council chose to, oh, the council
had also accepted, had already advertised the
project for bid, and the bids had been received.
The lowest bid was some million dollars over what
the city had in hand that was actually earmarked
for Congress Avenue. However, there were other
funds because it became prudent to include
certain other types of renovation, for instance,
the streetlight wiring system and so forth. And so
there were funds available from other city
coffers to take up the difference. But at any rate,
what has happened is the project has been stopped
at this point. But I guess the interesting thing is
not that Congress Avenue renovation has been
thwarted by merchants who failed to see the
benefits of it, which is partially true. But in my
view, I'm actually glad that it has stopped.
Because what Austin does not have, getting back to
planning, is that Austin does not have a downtown
plan. Downtown is treated no differently than any
other part of the city, and yet it functions in a
very special way. And if one is going to try to
improve the conditions in the central business
district, then there needs to be a plan from which
one works from. And you don't attack Congress
Avenue as a separate and distinctive part of the
downtown area. It's part of the downtown area. The
city has... A southeast corner of downtown is
what's called the Rainy Street area, and in that
area there are a lot of Chicano homes, and oh,
probably about 40 or 50 of them, and many of them
have been divided into apartments and so forth.
And so the Rainy Street area is part of downtown
Austin. Austin has the problem with the railroad
tracks downtown, and they have done a separate
study on the railroad tracks. They have...
conditions along 6th Street and its potential
business area of historic interest and
significance. That's a separate area. So I guess
what I'm saying is that... Where the Briscoe Hotel
is. Right, yes. So what I'm saying is that here they
are. They're talking about this thing downtown.
They're talking about this thing downtown and
this thing downtown, but they don't even have a
plan. And so what I say is we should first do a
downtown plan Oh, this also relates to about two
years ago when the city council authorized,
without real much public knowledge, a downtown
redevelopment plan for the area from 3rd through
1st Street, which was the American Cities Plan. So
here are all these issues. There's the American
Cities Plan and the ire that that arrived. That
fell flat on its face. Yes, exactly. And they've
got a real problem with this Rainey Street area
because of the Chicano community and their
feeling that they have a right to that part of
downtown. You have the conditions along 6th
Street, which clearly need to be brought under
control in terms of parking and other conditions
along the avenue. You have the Congress Avenue
controversy and problems. So here we have a whole
number of issues that all are downtown. Oh, the
railroads. What are we going to do about the
railroads? We're going to get rid of the railroads
and utilize that area in some other way. So you have
a whole bunch of problems down there that have
never been attacked from a planning standpoint at
all. Certainly not comprehensively. And we just
do a little bit here, a little bit there. And these
little tries you see fail. It seems to me that
downtown Austin has an interesting
juxtaposition of... features such as Town Lake
with the beautiful lake, a civic auditorium on one
side. It has a park strip that runs along it, which
is ideal. It is not that far away from the state
capitol. It is adjacent to the CBD. All of these
things come together, and this is going to cause
some pressure for certain types of development.
which may or may not be in the long-range interests
of the citizens of Austin. And it's going to be
interesting to see how the area immediately
adjacent to Turner Lake on the North Shore is
redeveloped in the coming decades. What would be
the objective of that particular area for
redevelopment south, for example, of where the
railroad tracks are now? Well, it has a... Right
now, there's no demand for it. That's probably the
saving grace. But at the same time, there's also no
plan for it. And I suppose that several planning
postures
would be obvious. And probably the major one that
would relate best to the lake and that amenity
would be the development of residential, highly
residential in the first couple of blocks along
Town Lake. A city where the same kind of conditions
sort of exist would be the shoreline along Lake
Michigan in Chicago. where there was a heavy
concentration along the North Shore of
residential use. Now, obviously, there's quite a
bit of difference between Lake Michigan and Town
Lake and Chicago and Austin, Texas. So maybe we're
talking about small townhouse types of
structures, two and three story, which would fit
in quite well. with an area of green developed
along the lake and then you move closer to north
toward the capital and you get into the central
business district where there are offices and
other businesses where many of the people living
in this area work so you have the possibility for a
very concentrated pretty pedestrian oriented
downtown austin and in fact you have two um nice
amenities of both sort of the north and south end of
downtown Austin. You have the Capitol on one side
and you have Town Lake on the other. And with the
Shoal Creek Hike and Bike Trail and the Waller
Creek Hike and Bike Trail, you have two nice
pedestrian things that bring you all the way down.
So there are, you know, some good potential. But
the only interest so far along Town Lake has been,
for instance, the Holiday Inn wanted to exchange
parkland for money with the city and take part of
the town lake to build another high rise tower and a
parking garage. Fortunately, that idea just
really met with disdain. And it would have set a
very dangerous precedent for the city to have even
a long term lease arrangement. That's what the
hotel said, we'll buy it, we'll lease it from you,
we just want this land. It just happened to be park.
So, unfortunately that didn't happen.
I think the main problem here is that there is no way
that the general plan, although it is adopted,
but it has no teeth in forcing the council to follow
it. And I'm not quite sure of the actual procedure
of adoption and what that means. I'm sure Dick
Lilly can tell you. But the city council, there's
nothing that forces the city council to do it. So a
very good master plan. drawn up under a previous
council who was very environmentally oriented,
hits a council that is not environmentally
oriented, but is oriented toward growth at
whatever cost, oriented toward serving the
development community. I know a developer who
told me that when Friedman Council came in, he went
to San Antonio, built houses down there for four
years. And as soon as McTowell got in, he moved
right back to Austin, because that's where he
wanted to be. He just couldn't do business here
with Friedman. I think that there's no way that the
comprehensive plan can have any continuity to it,
even if under the present conditions, because
there's no way that it's continuous. It just
depends on the council and which way they're going
to look. I think Austin has a number of problems,
because I don't think there's enough concern for
the environment here that makes the city that
people think of it as. It's a beautiful place to be,
but gee, I can take you to a lot of places and you
won't find it very pretty. And the things that are
here are things that we're not even protecting.
We're very happy to let Simon's build his mall out
there that is over the aquifer that furnishes
water for Barton Springs. And that much of the
shopping center land drains to the Barton Springs
watershed. And we're not even concerned about
that. There has been some good activity in
planning with regard to growth controls along
Town Lake. And there has been, most recently, but
only after real public assistance by private
groups, say Barton Creek, Barton Springs, and
other groups, has there been any control.